
Ospf Virtual Link

An OSPF Virtual Link is a logical connection used to extend the OSPF Backbone (Area 0) over a non-backbone area when direct connectivity is unavailable. It enables communication between an isolated area and Area 0, ensuring proper OSPF operation and route propagation.

Objective:

Implement OSPF on all routers.

Ensure that Area 2 is connected to the Backbone (Area 0).

Achieve full end-to-end network reachability.



Network Design Overview


Router1 (R1) & Router2 (R2) are ABR Routers

These routers connect Area 0 and Area 1.

They advertise inter-area prefixes using LSA Type 3.

Router3 (R3) is an Internal Router in Area 1

Learns R1 & R2 prefixes via LSA Type 3.

Advertises these LSA Type 3 prefixes to Router4 (R4).

Router4 (R4) is a Regular Router, NOT an ABR

It has one interface in Area 1 and one in Area 2.

Does NOT connect to Area 0, so it cannot advertise inter-area prefixes.

Router5 (R5) will not learn any prefixes from Area 0 or Area 1.

Router5 (R5) is an Internal Router in Area 2

It advertises its own prefixes as LSA Type 1 to Router4.

Router4 does not forward R5's prefixes to R3 because it is not an ABR.



Problem Statement:



Router5 cannot learn prefixes from Area 0 or Area 1.

Router1, Router2, and Router3 cannot learn prefixes from Router5.

Router4 cannot forward inter-area LSAs because it is not an ABR.


Solution: Create an OSPF Virtual Link


Establish a Virtual Link between R1 (ABR) and R4 (Non-ABR) via Area 1.

This logically extends Area 0 over Area 1, making Router4 act as an ABR.

Now, Router5 will receive inter-area routes, and full connectivity will be established.

Since Router4 is NOT an ABR, it cannot forward inter-area prefixes. We will create a Virtual Link between Router1 and Router4 over Area 1.

Final Outcome

 Router5 learns prefixes from Area 0 & Area 1.
 Router1, Router2, and Router3 learn prefixes from Router5.
 Full end-to-end connectivity is established.

Conclusion


An OSPF Virtual Link acts as a logical extension of Area 0.

It is required when an area is isolated from Area 0.

Virtual Links should be created between two ABRs over a transit area (non-stub/non-NSSA).

After configuring the Virtual Link, Router4 acts as an ABR, resolving the reachability issue.

This setup ensures that all routers, including R5, can communicate with Area 0, achieving full network reachability

use and trubleshoot commands 

show ip int br | ex Una
show ip protocols 
show ip ospf int br
show ip ospf ne 
show ip ospf int f0/0 | in network 
show ip ospf border-routers
show ip protocols | in area bo
show ip ospf virtula-links








